[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The first Buddhist text
that I ever read says,
look to your mind, wise
man, look to it well.
It is subtle, invisible,
and treacherous.
I really related
to the treacherous.
I mean, the whole thing, subtle
and invisible, but treacherous.
My name is Mark Epstein,
and I'm a psychiatrist
and a writer about Buddhism
and psychoanalysis.
I started doing meditation
retreats when I was 21 or so
and then started
writing about it.
So it's been a part
of my life ever since.
When I was still in
college, I looked
to both Buddhism
and psychotherapy
to try to find some relief.
My first therapist
told me, you're
just suffering from what
we call an Oedipus Complex.
And you should feel better
once you realize that.
And the language
helped me, but it
didn't give me an experience of
relief that I was looking for.
I went straight from there
to the Buddhist world.
And the first Buddhist
teachers that I met basically
told me, learn how to feel.
I had to sit back
into myself and start
to feel the texture
of my own experience.
Relaxing into that is
what I sometimes call
the formless art of meditation.
>> I'm Arlene Shekett,
and I'm a sculptor.
After graduate school, I
would listen to public radio
while I was working.
And they had Alan Watts tapes.
Sort of perked
something up in me
that I started to think of as
very aligned with art making.
>> You can look at something
with a microscope and see it
a certain way.
You can look at it
with a naked eye
and see it in a certain way.
You could look at
it with a telescope,
and you'd see it in another way.
>> The drone of his voice
and the strangeness of his
metaphors was attractive to me.
>> Some human beings have
slipped somehow or other
into states of consciousness
where they see the apparent
disintegration and
disorganization of everyday
life as completely harmonious.
>> The notion of being in the
zone or a creative state was
very much the kind of meditative
consciousness that he was
talking about.
I don't think meditation
is about stillness.
A spiritual practice has to do
with awareness and attention
and sensitivity to being alive.
And to those things,
those qualities
of aliveness and everything,
I use awareness in the studio.
And I want to be bringing
that aliveness into the work.
And I want to be paying
attention in the studio
to what's happening.
>> There's a text about
mindfulness that when I was
on one of these retreats, the
phrase came to me when I was
sitting.
Something like the monk sits
down cross-legged and places
his mindfulness before him.
>> There was one time when Mark
went on a meditation retreat
that both kids got chicken
pox at the same time,
and I was alone.
So that was sort of a
memorable experience.
>> I don't remember that.
>> Yeah.
We're married.
>> How long have
you been married?
>> 30 years.
>> 30-- no, 31.
31.
>> And counting.
>> Mhm.
>> It wasn't either of our
first major relationships.
And one of the things that
we always talked about
was that we needed
the separate time,
but also the together time.
>> He didn't actually get--
>> Yeah, what that was.
>> How much time, how much
time and effort that I required
in that forum.
Because when we first got
together, he was like,
where are you going.
>> Yeah, that's when
I started writing.
>> Yeah.
>> I started writing when
Arlene went to her studio.
Because I was just assuming
we'd be together, you know?
>> Yeah, you were like, what?
Where are you going?
I said, studio.
So it was a little bumpy there.
>> I never thought of
myself as a writer.
It surprised me.
My latest book is called "The
Trauma of Everyday Life".
What I realized
is that we're all
going to experience the
trauma of our own deaths
or the deaths of the people
that we love the most.
If we're not suffering
from post-traumatic stress,
we're suffering from
pre-traumatic stress.
And we sense that.
That's part of the shaky
ground of everyday life.
From the Buddhist point of
view, the way out is through.
That by facing those
most difficult feelings,
we actually can find
some relief from them.
There comes a point, I
found, with meditation
where you have to really take
it inside and make it your own.
And that's about
figuring out how
to let yourself present
itself to your mind.
Get who you think you
are out of the way
so that what you don't
know can begin to surface.
>> I make decisions about
how I'm going to work,
what I'm going to work
with, and ultimately, then,
what is made based on not
predetermining what I'm going
to create before I
actually make the thing.
So I choose materials
based on how
they respond to me,
to the moment, body
to body, right then and there.
When I first started
thinking like this,
I was using hydracal,
a combination
of cement and plaster.
And that material,
within 5 to 10 minutes,
it is transformed
from something that
is a liquid to something
that is completely hard.
So it was like working against
time with time using time.
That was probably my
first Buddhist version
of what it could be like
to be in the studio.
>> I've learned from being
married to an artist there was
a process of making art which
is akin to the process of making
meditation where you have
to be both the maker,
but also you have to be able to
lose yourself in the thing that
you are making.
>> One day I was working, and I
made this lump that most people
would not identify as a Buddha.
But I realized I was already
thinking about this time issue,
and that it had in
fact made me see
this lump as something iconic.
And to have the
Buddha around was
reminding me to pay attention.
And not thinking about it
as anything but practice,
I grew the next two years this
family of Buddhas that I felt,
in fact, became art,
but also something else.
We have two kids, a
27-year-old daughter and a son
who just turned 24 this week.
They're just spectacular.
We're all, I think,
pretty secure in wanting
to be in the family,
which is exciting.
Having kids has been a
complete and utter teaching
about things changing and
growing and transforming.
>> The core teaching of Buddhism
not to push away the unpleasant
and not to cling to the pleasant
let me see how family life was
a kind of extended
meditation retreat.
You know, like a 20
year meditation retreat.
That you needed the same
approach, which was whatever
comes I'm going to deal with.
>> Accepting that the
relationship is alive means
accepting that it's not
necessarily an easy thing.
>> The relationship
itself is always evolving.
It's always changing.
And to treat it as something
that has to be nourished,
that could never be
totally understood.
That whole way of approaching
the relationship for me
comes out of the Dharma.
>> We've had really strong
times and really, you know,
weak links.
But we've managed to pull it--
we're here right now.
I don't know what to say.
We're the--
>> Still ongoing.
>> We're for-- the
forum is ongoing.
We're inventing it as we speak.